<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<p style="text-align: center">SCENE—Same as in Act I.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Lying on sofa</i>.]  How can I tell him?  I can’t tell him.  It would kill me.  I wonder what happened after I escaped from that horrible room.  Perhaps she told them the true reason of her being there, and the real meaning of that—fatal fan of mine.  Oh, if he knows—how can I look him in the face again?  He would never forgive me.  [<i>Touches bell</i>.]  How securely one thinks one lives—out of reach of temptation, sin, folly.  And then suddenly—Oh!  Life is terrible.  It rules us, we do not rule it.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Rosalie</span> <i>R.</i>]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Rosalie</span>.  Did your ladyship ring for me?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes.  Have you found out at what time Lord Windermere came in last night?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Rosalie</span>.  His lordship did not come in till five o’clock.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Five o’clock?  He knocked at my door this morning, didn’t he?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Rosalie</span>.  Yes, my lady—at half-past nine.  I told him your ladyship was not awake yet.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Did he say anything?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Rosalie</span>.  Something about your ladyship’s fan.  I didn’t quite catch what his lordship said.  Has the fan been lost, my lady?  I can’t find it, and Parker says it was not left in any of the rooms.  He has looked in all of them and on the terrace as well.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  It doesn’t matter.  Tell Parker not to trouble.  That will do.</p>
			<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Rosalie</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  She is sure to tell him.  I can fancy a person doing a wonderful act of self-sacrifice, doing it spontaneously, recklessly, nobly—and afterwards finding out that it costs too much.  Why should she hesitate between her ruin and mine? . . . How strange!  I would have publicly disgraced her in my own house.  She accepts public disgrace in the house of another to save me. . . . There is a bitter irony in things, a bitter irony in the way we talk of good and bad women. . . . Oh, what a lesson! and what a pity that in life we only get our lessons when they are of no use to us!  For even if she doesn’t tell, I must.  Oh! the shame of it, the shame of it.  To tell it is to live through it all again.  Actions are the first tragedy in life, words are the second.  Words are perhaps the worst.  Words are merciless. . . . Oh!  [<i>Starts as</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span> <i>enters</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Kisses her</i>.]  Margaret—how pale you look!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I slept very badly.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Sitting on sofa with her</i>.]  I am so sorry.  I came in dreadfully late, and didn’t like to wake you.  You are crying, dear.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes, I am crying, for I have something to tell you, Arthur.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  My dear child, you are not well.  You’ve been doing too much.  Let us go away to the country.  You’ll be all right at Selby.  The season is almost over.  There is no use staying on.  Poor darling!  We’ll go away to-day, if you like.  [<i>Rises</i>.]  We can easily catch the 3.40.  I’ll send a wire to Fannen.  [<i>Crosses and sits down at table to write a telegram</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes; let us go away to-day.  No; I can’t go to-day, Arthur.  There is some one I must see before I leave town—some one who has been kind to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Rising and leaning over sofa</i>.]  Kind to you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Far more than that.  [<i>Rises and goes to him</i>.]  I will tell you, Arthur, but only love me, love me as you used to love me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Used to?  You are not thinking of that wretched woman who came here last night?  [<i>Coming round and sitting R. of her</i>.]  You don’t still imagine—no, you couldn’t.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I don’t.  I know now I was wrong and foolish.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  It was very good of you to receive her last night—but you are never to see her again.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Why do you say that?  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Holding her hand</i>.]  Margaret, I thought Mrs. Erlynne was a woman more sinned against than sinning, as the phrase goes.  I thought she wanted to be good, to get back into a place that she had lost by a moment’s folly, to lead again a decent life.  I believed what she told me—I was mistaken in her.  She is bad—as bad as a woman can be.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Arthur, Arthur, don’t talk so bitterly about any woman.  I don’t think now that people can be divided into the good and the bad as though they were two separate races or creations.  What are called good women may have terrible things in them, mad moods of recklessness, assertion, jealousy, sin.  Bad women, as they are termed, may have in them sorrow, repentance, pity, sacrifice.  And I don’t think Mrs. Erlynne a bad woman—I know she’s not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  My dear child, the woman’s impossible.  No matter what harm she tries to do us, you must never see her again.  She is inadmissible anywhere.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  But I want to see her.  I want her to come here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Never!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  She came here once as <i>your</i> guest.  She must come now as <i>mine</i>.  That is but fair.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  She should never have come here.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  It is too late, Arthur, to say that now.  [<i>Moves away</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Margaret, if you knew where Mrs. Erlynne went last night, after she left this house, you would not sit in the same room with her.  It was absolutely shameless, the whole thing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Arthur, I can’t bear it any longer.  I must tell you.  Last night—</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Parker</span> <i>with a tray on which lie</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere’s</span> <i>fan and a card</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Parker</span>.  Mrs. Erlynne has called to return your ladyship’s fan which she took away by mistake last night.  Mrs. Erlynne has written a message on the card.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Oh, ask Mrs. Erlynne to be kind enough to come up.  [<i>Reads card</i>.]  Say I shall be very glad to see her.</p>
			<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Parker</span>.]</p>
			<p>She wants to see me, Arthur.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Takes card and looks at it</i>.]  Margaret, I <i>beg</i> you not to.  Let me see her first, at any rate.  She’s a very dangerous woman.  She is the most dangerous woman I know.  You don’t realise what you’re doing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  It is right that I should see her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  My child, you may be on the brink of a great sorrow.  Don’t go to meet it.  It is absolutely necessary that I should see her before you do.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Why should it be necessary?</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Parker</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Parker</span>.  Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.]</p>
			<p style="text-align: right">[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Parker</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  How do you do, Lady Windermere?  [<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.]  How do you do?  Do you know, Lady Windermere, I am so sorry about your fan.  I can’t imagine how I made such a silly mistake.  Most stupid of me.  And as I was driving in your direction, I thought I would take the opportunity of returning your property in person with many apologies for my carelessness, and of bidding you good-bye.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Good-bye?  [<i>Moves towards sofa with</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span> <i>and sits down beside her</i>.]  Are you going away, then, Mrs. Erlynne?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Yes; I am going to live abroad again.  The English climate doesn’t suit me.  My—heart is affected here, and that I don’t like.  I prefer living in the south.  London is too full of fogs and—and serious people, Lord Windermere.  Whether the fogs produce the serious people or whether the serious people produce the fogs, I don’t know, but the whole thing rather gets on my nerves, and so I’m leaving this afternoon by the Club Train.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  This afternoon?  But I wanted so much to come and see you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  How kind of you!  But I am afraid I have to go.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Shall I never see you again, Mrs. Erlynne?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  I am afraid not.  Our lives lie too far apart.  But there is a little thing I would like you to do for me.  I want a photograph of you, Lady Windermere—would you give me one?  You don’t know how gratified I should be.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Oh, with pleasure.  There is one on that table.  I’ll show it to you. [<i>Goes across to the table</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Coming up to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span> <i>and speaking in a low voice</i>.]  It is monstrous your intruding yourself here after your conduct last night.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>With an amused smile</i>.]  My dear Windermere, manners before morals!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Returning</i>.]  I’m afraid it is very flattering—I am not so pretty as that.  [<i>Showing photograph</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  You are much prettier.  But haven’t you got one of yourself with your little boy?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I have.  Would you prefer one of those?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I’ll go and get it for you, if you’ll excuse me for a moment.  I have one upstairs.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  So sorry, Lady Windermere, to give you so much trouble.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Moves to door R.</i>]  No trouble at all, Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Thanks so much.</p>
			<p>[<i>Exit</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span> <i>R.</i>]  You seem rather out of temper this morning, Windermere.  Why should you be?  Margaret and I get on charmingly together.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I can’t bear to see you with her.  Besides, you have not told me the truth, Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  I have not told <i>her</i> the truth, you mean.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Standing C.</i>]  I sometimes wish you had.  I should have been spared then the misery, the anxiety, the annoyance of the last six months.  But rather than my wife should know—that the mother whom she was taught to consider as dead, the mother whom she has mourned as dead, is living—a divorced woman, going about under an assumed name, a bad woman preying upon life, as I know you now to be—rather than that, I was ready to supply you with money to pay bill after bill, extravagance after extravagance, to risk what occurred yesterday, the first quarrel I have ever had with my wife.  You don’t understand what that means to me.  How could you?  But I tell you that the only bitter words that ever came from those sweet lips of hers were on your account, and I hate to see you next her.  You sully the innocence that is in her. [<i>Moves L.C.</i>]  And then I used to think that with all your faults you were frank and honest.  You are not.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Why do you say that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  You made me get you an invitation to my wife’s ball.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  For my daughter’s ball—yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  You came, and within an hour of your leaving the house you are found in a man’s rooms—you are disgraced before every one.  [<i>Goes up stage C.</i>]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Yes.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Turning round on her</i>.]  Therefore I have a right to look upon you as what you are—a worthless, vicious woman.  I have the right to tell you never to enter this house, never to attempt to come near my wife—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Coldly</i>.]  My daughter, you mean.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  You have no right to claim her as your daughter.  You left her, abandoned her when she was but a child in the cradle, abandoned her for your lover, who abandoned you in turn.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Do you count that to his credit, Lord Windermere—or to mine?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  To his, now that I know you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Take care—you had better be careful.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Oh, I am not going to mince words for you.  I know you thoroughly.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Looks steadily at him</i>.]  I question that.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I <i>do</i> know you.  For twenty years of your life you lived without your child, without a thought of your child.  One day you read in the papers that she had married a rich man.  You saw your hideous chance.  You knew that to spare her the ignominy of learning that a woman like you was her mother, I would endure anything.  You began your blackmailing.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Shrugging her shoulders</i>.]  Don’t use ugly words, Windermere.  They are vulgar.  I saw my chance, it is true, and took it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Yes, you took it—and spoiled it all last night by being found out.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>With a strange smile</i>.]  You are quite right, I spoiled it all last night.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  And as for your blunder in taking my wife’s fan from here and then leaving it about in Darlington’s rooms, it is unpardonable.  I can’t bear the sight of it now.  I shall never let my wife use it again.  The thing is soiled for me.  You should have kept it and not brought it back.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  I think I shall keep it.  [<i>Goes up</i>.]  It’s extremely pretty.  [<i>Takes up fan</i>.]  I shall ask Margaret to give it to me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I hope my wife will give it you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Oh, I’m sure she will have no objection.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I wish that at the same time she would give you a miniature she kisses every night before she prays—It’s the miniature of a young innocent-looking girl with beautiful <i>dark</i> hair.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Ah, yes, I remember.  How long ago that seems!  [<i>Goes to sofa and sits down</i>.]  It was done before I was married.  Dark hair and an innocent expression were the fashion then, Windermere!  [<i>A pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  What do you mean by coming here this morning?  What is your object?  [<i>Crossing L.C. and sitting</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>With a note of irony in her voice</i>.]  To bid good-bye to my dear daughter, of course.  [<span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span> <i>bites his under lip in anger</i>.  <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span> <i>looks at him</i>, <i>and her voice and manner become serious</i>.  <i>In her accents as she talks there is a note of deep tragedy</i>.  <i>For a moment she reveals herself</i>.]  Oh, don’t imagine I am going to have a pathetic scene with her, weep on her neck and tell her who I am, and all that kind of thing.  I have no ambition to play the part of a mother.  Only once in my life have I known a mother’s feelings.  That was last night.  They were terrible—they made me suffer—they made me suffer too much.  For twenty years, as you say, I have lived childless,—I want to live childless still.  [<i>Hiding her feelings with a trivial laugh</i>.]  Besides, my dear Windermere, how on earth could I pose as a mother with a grown-up daughter?  Margaret is twenty-one, and I have never admitted that I am more than twenty-nine, or thirty at the most.  Twenty-nine when there are pink shades, thirty when there are not.  So you see what difficulties it would involve.  No, as far as I am concerned, let your wife cherish the memory of this dead, stainless mother.  Why should I interfere with her illusions?  I find it hard enough to keep my own.  I lost one illusion last night.  I thought I had no heart.  I find I have, and a heart doesn’t suit me, Windermere.  Somehow it doesn’t go with modern dress.  It makes one look old.  [<i>Takes up hand-mirror from table and looks into it</i>.]  And it spoils one’s career at critical moments.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  You fill me with horror—with absolute horror.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  I suppose, Windermere, you would like me to retire into a convent, or become a hospital nurse, or something of that kind, as people do in silly modern novels.  That is stupid of you, Arthur; in real life we don’t do such things—not as long as we have any good looks left, at any rate.  No—what consoles one nowadays is not repentance, but pleasure.  Repentance is quite out of date.  And besides, if a woman really repents, she has to go to a bad dressmaker, otherwise no one believes in her.  And nothing in the world would induce me to do that.  No; I am going to pass entirely out of your two lives.  My coming into them has been a mistake—I discovered that last night.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  A fatal mistake.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Smiling</i>.]  Almost fatal.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I am sorry now I did not tell my wife the whole thing at once.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  I regret my bad actions.  You regret your good ones—that is the difference between us.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I don’t trust you.  I <i>will</i> tell my wife.  It’s better for her to know, and from me.  It will cause her infinite pain—it will humiliate her terribly, but it’s right that she should know.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  You propose to tell her?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I am going to tell her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Going up to him</i>.]  If you do, I will make my name so infamous that it will mar every moment of her life.  It will ruin her, and make her wretched.  If you dare to tell her, there is no depth of degradation I will not sink to, no pit of shame I will not enter.  You shall not tell her—I forbid you.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Why?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>After a pause</i>.]  If I said to you that I cared for her, perhaps loved her even—you would sneer at me, wouldn’t you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  I should feel it was not true.  A mother’s love means devotion, unselfishness, sacrifice.  What could you know of such things?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  You are right.  What could I know of such things?  Don’t let us talk any more about it—as for telling my daughter who I am, that I do not allow.  It is my secret, it is not yours.  If I make up my mind to tell her, and I think I will, I shall tell her before I leave the house—if not, I shall never tell her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Angrily</i>.]  Then let me beg of you to leave our house at once.  I will make your excuses to Margaret.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span> <i>R.</i>  <i>She goes over to</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span> <i>with the photograph in her hand</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span> <i>moves to back of sofa</i>, <i>and anxiously watches</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span> <i>as the scene progresses</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I am so sorry, Mrs. Erlynne, to have kept you waiting.  I couldn’t find the photograph anywhere.  At last I discovered it in my husband’s dressing-room—he had stolen it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Takes the photograph from her and looks at it</i>.]  I am not surprised—it is charming.  [<i>Goes over to sofa with</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>, <i>and sits down beside her</i>.  <i>Looks again at the photograph</i>.]  And so that is your little boy!  What is he called?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Gerard, after my dear father.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Laying the photograph down</i>.]  Really?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes.  If it had been a girl, I would have called it after my mother.  My mother had the same name as myself, Margaret.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  My name is Margaret too.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Indeed!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Yes.  [<i>Pause</i>.]  You are devoted to your mother’s memory, Lady Windermere, your husband tells me.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  We all have ideals in life.  At least we all should have.  Mine is my mother.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Ideals are dangerous things.  Realities are better.  They wound, but they’re better.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Shaking her head</i>.]  If I lost my ideals, I should lose everything.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Everything?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes.  [<i>Pause</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Did your father often speak to you of your mother?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  No, it gave him too much pain.  He told me how my mother had died a few months after I was born.  His eyes filled with tears as he spoke.  Then he begged me never to mention her name to him again.  It made him suffer even to hear it.  My father—my father really died of a broken heart.  His was the most ruined life know.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  I am afraid I must go now, Lady Windermere.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Rising</i>.]  Oh no, don’t.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  I think I had better.  My carriage must have come back by this time.  I sent it to Lady Jedburgh’s with a note.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Arthur, would you mind seeing if Mrs. Erlynne’s carriage has come back?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Pray don’t trouble, Lord Windermere.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Yes, Arthur, do go, please.</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span> <i>hesitated for a moment and looks at</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  <i>She remains quite impassive</i>.  <i>He leaves the room</i>.]</p>
			<p>[<i>To</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.]  Oh!  What am I to say to you?  You saved me last night?  [<i>Goes towards her</i>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Hush—don’t speak of it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I must speak of it.  I can’t let you think that I am going to accept this sacrifice.  I am not.  It is too great.  I am going to tell my husband everything.  It is my duty.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  It is not your duty—at least you have duties to others besides him.  You say you owe me something?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  I owe you everything.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Then pay your debt by silence.  That is the only way in which it can be paid.  Don’t spoil the one good thing I have done in my life by telling it to any one.  Promise me that what passed last night will remain a secret between us.  You must not bring misery into your husband’s life.  Why spoil his love?  You must not spoil it.  Love is easily killed.  Oh! how easily love is killed.  Pledge me your word, Lady Windermere, that you will never tell him.  I insist upon it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>With bowed head</i>.]  It is your will, not mine.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Yes, it is my will.  And never forget your child—I like to think of you as a mother.  I like you to think of yourself as one.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Looking up</i>.]  I always will now.  Only once in my life I have forgotten my own mother—that was last night.  Oh, if I had remembered her I should not have been so foolish, so wicked.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>With a slight shudder</i>.]  Hush, last night is quite over.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Your carriage has not come back yet, Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  It makes no matter.  I’ll take a hansom.  There is nothing in the world so respectable as a good Shrewsbury and Talbot.  And now, dear Lady Windermere, I am afraid it is really good-bye.  [<i>Moves up C.</i>]  Oh, I remember.  You’ll think me absurd, but do you know I’ve taken a great fancy to this fan that I was silly enough to run away with last night from your ball.  Now, I wonder would you give it to me?  Lord Windermere says you may.  I know it is his present.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Oh, certainly, if it will give you any pleasure.  But it has my name on it.  It has ‘Margaret’ on it.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  But we have the same Christian name.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Oh, I forgot.  Of course, do have it.  What a wonderful chance our names being the same!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  Quite wonderful.  Thanks—it will always remind me of you.  [<i>Shakes hands with her</i>.]</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Parker</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Parker</span>.  Lord Augustus Lorton.  Mrs. Erlynne’s carriage has come.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  Good morning, dear boy.  Good morning, Lady Windermere.  [<i>Sees</i> <span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.]  Mrs. Erlynne!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  How do you do, Lord Augustus?  Are you quite well this morning?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  [<i>Coldly</i>.]  Quite well, thank you, Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  You don’t look at all well, Lord Augustus.  You stop up too late—it is so bad for you.  You really should take more care of yourself.  Good-bye, Lord Windermere. [<i>Goes towards door with a bow to</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  <i>Suddenly smiles and looks back at him</i>.]  Lord Augustus!  Won’t you see me to my carriage?  You might carry the fan.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Allow me!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  No; I want Lord Augustus.  I have a special message for the dear Duchess.  Won’t you carry the fan, Lord Augustus?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  If you really desire it, Mrs. Erlynne.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Mrs. Erlynne</span>.  [<i>Laughing</i>.]  Of course I do.  You’ll carry it so gracefully.  You would carry off anything gracefully, dear Lord Augustus.</p>
			<p>[<i>When she reaches the door she looks back for a moment at</i> <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  <i>Their eyes meet</i>.  <i>Then she turns</i>, <i>and exit C. followed by</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  You will never speak against Mrs. Erlynne again, Arthur, will you?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Gravely</i>.]  She is better than one thought her.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  She is better than I am.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Smiling as he strokes her hair</i>.]  Child, you and she belong to different worlds.  Into your world evil has never entered.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  Don’t say that, Arthur.  There is the same world for all of us, and good and evil, sin and innocence, go through it hand in hand.  To shut one’s eyes to half of life that one may live securely is as though one blinded oneself that one might walk with more safety in a land of pit and precipice.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  [<i>Moves down with her</i>.]  Darling, why do you say that?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Sits on sofa</i>.]  Because I, who had shut my eyes to life, came to the brink.  And one who had separated us—</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  We were never separated.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  We never must be again.  O Arthur, don’t love me less, and I will trust you more.  I will trust you absolutely.  Let us go to Selby.  In the Rose Garden at Selby the roses are white and red.</p>
			<p>[<i>Enter</i> <span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span> <i>C.</i>]</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  Arthur, she has explained everything!</p>
			<p>[<span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span> <i>looks horribly frightened at this</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span> <i>starts</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span> <i>takes</i> <span class="smcap">Windermere</span> <i>by the arm and brings him to front of stage</i>.  <i>He talks rapidly and in a low voice</i>.  <span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span> <i>stands watching them in terror</i>.]  My dear fellow, she has explained every demmed thing.  We all wronged her immensely.  It was entirely for my sake she went to Darlington’s rooms.  Called first at the Club—fact is, wanted to put me out of suspense—and being told I had gone on—followed—naturally frightened when she heard a lot of us coming in—retired to another room—I assure you, most gratifying to me, the whole thing.  We all behaved brutally to her.  She is just the woman for me.  Suits me down to the ground.  All the conditions she makes are that we live entirely out of England.  A very good thing too.  Demmed clubs, demmed climate, demmed cooks, demmed everything.  Sick of it all!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Frightened</i>.]  Has Mrs. Erlynne—?</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Augustus</span>.  [<i>Advancing towards her with a low bow</i>.]  Yes, Lady Windermere—  Mrs. Erlynne has done me the honour of accepting my hand.</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lord Windermere</span>.  Well, you are certainly marrying a very clever woman!</p>
			<p><span class="smcap">Lady Windermere</span>.  [<i>Taking her husband’s hand</i>.]  Ah, you’re marrying a very good woman!</p>
			<div class="gapspace"> </div>
			<p style="text-align: center">
				<span class="smcap">Curtain</span>
			</p>
			<div style="display:block; margin-top:4em">*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LADY WINDERMERE’S FAN ***</div>
			<div style="text-align:left">
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will be renamed.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.</div>
				<div style="margin:0.83em 0; font-size:1.1em; text-align:center">START: FULL LICENSE<br/>
				<span style="font-size:smaller">THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE<br/>
				PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK</span></div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.</div>
				<div style="display:block; font-size:1.1em; margin:1em 0; font-weight:bold">Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it without charge with others.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:</div>
				<blockquote>
					<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at <a href="https://www.gutenberg.org">www.gutenberg.org</a>. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.</div>
				</blockquote>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that:</div>
				<div style="margin-left:0.7em;">
					<div style="text-indent:-0.7em">• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”</div>
					<div style="text-indent:-0.7em">• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.</div>
					<div style="text-indent:-0.7em">• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of receipt of the work.</div>
					<div style="text-indent:-0.7em">• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.</div>
				</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect you cause.</div>
				<div style="display:block; font-size:1.1em; margin:1em 0; font-weight:bold">Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.</div>
				<div style="display:block; font-size:1.1em; margin:1em 0; font-weight:bold">Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact</div>
				<div style="display:block; font-size:1.1em; margin:1em 0; font-weight:bold">Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit <a href="https://www.gutenberg.org/donate/">www.gutenberg.org/donate</a>.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate</div>
				<div style="display:block; font-size:1.1em; margin:1em 0; font-weight:bold">Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">Most people start at our website which has the main PG search facility: <a href="https://www.gutenberg.org">www.gutenberg.org</a>.</div>
				<div style="display:block; margin:1em 0">This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
